lessons/03-working-with-files.md, before:

# Working with Files and Directories

> Teaching: 30 min | Exercises: 15 min

## Questions

- How can I view and search file contents?

- How can I create, copy and delete files and directories?

- How can I control who has permission to modify a file?

- How can I repeat recently used commands?


## Objectives

- View, search within, copy, move, and rename files. Create new directories.

- Use wildcards (`*`) to perform operations on multiple files.

- Make a file read only

- Use the `history` command to view and repeat recently used commands.



## Working with Files

### Wildcards

Now that we know how to navigate around our directory structure, let's
start working with **our sequencing files**. We did a sequencing experiment and 
have four result files, which are stored in our `untrimmed_fastq` directory. 

Navigate to your `untrimmed_fastq` directory.

~~~
$ cd /workspaces/codespace-metagenomics-shell/dc_workshop/data/untrimmed_fastq
~~~

We are interested in looking at the FASTQ files in this directory. We can list
all files with the `.fastq` extension using the command:

~~~
$ ls *.fastq
~~~

~~~
JC1A_R1.fastq JC1A_R2.fastq JP4D_R1.fastq JP4D_R2.fastq
~~~

The `*` character is a special type of character called a wildcard, which can be used to represent any number of any type of character. 
Thus, `*.fastq` matches every file that ends with `.fastq`. 

This command: 

~~~
$ ls *R1.fastq
~~~

~~~
JC1A_R1.fastq JP4D_R1.fastq
~~~

lists only the file that ends with `R1.fastq`.

## Command History

If you want to repeat a command that you've run recently, you can access previous
commands using the up arrow on your keyboard to go back to the most recent
command. Likewise, the down arrow takes you forward in the command history.

A few more useful shortcuts: 

- <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>+<kbd>C</kbd> will cancel the command you are writing, and give you a 
fresh prompt.
- <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>+<kbd>R</kbd> will do a reverse-search through your command history.  This
is very useful.
- <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>+<kbd>L</kbd> or the `clear` command will clear your screen.

You can also review your recent commands with the `history` command, by entering:

~~~
$ history
~~~

to see a numbered list of recent commands. You can reuse one of these commands
directly by referring to the number of that command.

For example, if your history looked like this:

~~~
259  ls *
260  ls /usr/bin/*.sh
261  ls *R1*fastq
~~~

then you could repeat command #260 by entering:

~~~
$ !260
~~~

Type `!` (exclamation point) and then the number of the command from your history.
You will be glad you learned this when you need to re-run very complicated commands.

## Examining Files

We now know how to switch directories, run programs, and look at the
contents of directories, but how do we look at the contents of files?

One way to examine a file is to print out on the screen all of the
contents using the program `cat`.
~~~
$ cat JC1A_R2.fastq
~~~

`cat` is a terrific program, but, as you just saw if you ran the command, when the file is really big (as the files we have), it can
be annoying to use. You can always use Ctrl+C to stop the command.  

The program, `less`, is useful for this
case. `less` opens the file as read only, and lets you navigate through it. The navigation commands
are identical to the `man` program.

Enter the following command:

~~~
$ less JC1A_R2.fastq
~~~

Some navigation commands in `less`

| key     | action |
| ------- | ---------- |
| <kbd>Space</kbd> | to go forward |
|  <kbd>b</kbd>    | to go backward |
|  <kbd>g</kbd>    | to go to the beginning |
|  <kbd>G</kbd>    | to go to the end |
|  <kbd>q</kbd>    | to quit |

`less` also gives you a way of searching through files. Use the
"/" key to begin a search. Enter the word you would like
to search for and press `enter`. The screen will jump to the next location where
that word is found. 

**Shortcut:** If you hit "/" then "enter", `less` will  repeat
the previous search. `less` searches from the current location and
works its way forward. Note, if you are at the end of the file and search
for the sequence "CAA", `less` will not find it. You either need to go to the
beginning of the file (by typing `g`) and search again using `/` or you
can use `?` to search backwards in the same way you used `/` previously.

For instance, let's search forward for the sequence `TTTTT` in our file. 
You can see that we go right to that sequence, what it looks like,
and where it is in the file. If you continue to type `/` and hit return, you will move 
forward to the next instance of this sequence motif. If you instead type `?` and hit 
return, you will search backwards and move up the file to previous examples of this motif.

Remember, the `man` program actually uses `less` internally and
therefore uses the same commands, so you can search documentation
using "/" as well!

There's another way that we can look at files, and in this case, just
look at part of them. This can be particularly useful if we just want
to see the beginning or end of the file, or see how it's formatted.

The commands are `head` and `tail` and they let you look at
the beginning and end of a file, respectively.

~~~
$ head JC1A_R2.fastq
~~~

~~~
@MISEQ-LAB244-W7:91:000000000-A5C7L:1:1101:13417:1998 2:N:0:TCGNAG
CGCGATCAGCAGCGGCCCGGAACCGGTCAGCCGCGCCNTGGGGTTCAGCACCGGCNNGGCGAAGGCCGCGATCGCGGCGGCGGCGATCAGGCAGCGCAGCAGCAGGAGCCACCAGGGCGTGCGGTCGGGCGTCCGTTCGGCGTCCTCGCGCCCCAGCAGCAGGCGCACGCCAGGGAATCCGACCCGCCGCCGGCTCGGCCGCGTCNCCCGCNCCCGCCCCCCGAGCACCCGNAGCCNCNCCACCGCCGCCC
+
1>AAADAAFFF1G11AA0000AAFE/AAE0FBAEGGG#B/>EF/EGHHHHHHG?C##???/FE/ECHCE?C<FGGGGCCCGGGG@?AE.BFFEAB-9@@@FFFFFEEEEFBFF--99A-;@B=@A@@?@@>-@@--/B--@--@@-F----;@--:F---9-AB9=-@-9E-99A-;:BF-9-@@-;@-@#############################################################
@MISEQ-LAB244-W7:91:000000000-A5C7L:1:1101:15782:2187 2:N:0:TCGAAG
CAACCGGCTGATCCTCGACGCCATCGAGGCGACCGGCGCCGGCGCCGACGGGCTGATCACCGCCGCCGAGGTCGTCGCGATCAACGCGGCGATCCGCGGCGACGCGACGCCCCTCGCCGACTTCGTCGACCTGCACGGCGACGACGAGGAGGGCCTCGAGACCGGCTTCCCCCTGATCCAGGGCGACGGCGCCGCGACGCAGCTCGGCGGGTTCCACCCTCCTCACCGGGCCGCCGCCGGCTTCTACCCGA
+
BBBBBBBBDBFFGGFFEEGEFG2FHGFEGCA?EEGCE@EFEEE/EEE@EDCFDCAC2G2CG?CC/CFG?C?DHFCGCGFD-C.0;DFA-AD;AFFFF;DF-BB--@;>9D-@DAD->>=-@-9FFBDCFFFFB?.FE@---;@9@--9@9AD;D?.F.9..AE;C;-;;B.;D##############################################################################
@MISEQ-LAB244-W7:91:000000000-A5C7L:1:1101:11745:2196 2:N:0:NCGAAG
CGAAAAGCCGCGCGCCGACCTGGGCGTCGAGCGCCGCGCCGCTCCAACGAACGCCAGGCGATCCGAGCGCGGCGGCGATGGCACCCGGATCGAGCCCGGTAAAGTCGGCCCGTAGGTCGAGGCCGCCGCCGCCAGGCGCCACTTCGAGCCGTGGGAGATGCAACGTTAGCGGCGCCGCCCCGTCGGCCGTCTCGAGCAAAATGCGCGTGTCGGTGAGCCGCCGGTGCTCCGGCAACCGCATCCTGCGCCAG

~~~

~~~
$ tail JC1A_R2.fastq
~~~

~~~
+SRR098026.247 HWUSI-EAS1599_1:2:1:2:1311 length=35
#!##!#################!!!!!!!######
@SRR098026.248 HWUSI-EAS1599_1:2:1:2:118 length=35
GNTGNGGTCATCATACGCGCCCNNNNNNNGGCATG
+SRR098026.248 HWUSI-EAS1599_1:2:1:2:118 length=35
B!;?!A=5922:##########!!!!!!!######
@SRR098026.249 HWUSI-EAS1599_1:2:1:2:1057 length=35
CNCTNTATGCGTACGGCAGTGANNNNNNNGGAGAT
+SRR098026.249 HWUSI-EAS1599_1:2:1:2:1057 length=35
A!@B!BBB@ABAB#########!!!!!!!######
~~~

The `-n` option to either of these commands can be used to print the
first or last `n` lines of a file. 

~~~
$ head -n 1 JC1A_R2.fastq
~~~

~~~
@MISEQ-LAB244-W7:91:000000000-A5C7L:1:1101:13417:1998 2:N:0:TCGNAG
~~~

~~~
$ tail -n 1 JC1A_R2.fastq
~~~

~~~
AAA#>>A#1>AAGGGGGGGG#ABFEFGGHGEFGEGGGEGFHHHGGGGGGGGEEEEEGCG?EGHHHG@CC#??#???FFG############################################################################################################################################################################
~~~


> ## Details on the FASTQ format
> Since we are learning while using FASTQ files, let's understand what they are.
> Although it looks complicated (and it is), it's easy to understand the
> [fastq](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FASTQ_format) format with a little decoding. Some rules about the format
> include...
> 
> |Line|Description|
> |----|-----------|
> |1|Always begins with '@' and then information about the read|
> |2|The actual DNA sequence|
> |3|Always begins with a '+' and sometimes the same info in line 1|
> |4|Has a string of characters which represent the quality scores; must have same number of characters as line 2|
> 
> We can view the first complete read in one of the files our dataset by using `head` to look at
> the first four lines.
> 
> ~~~
> $ head -n 4 JC1A_R2.fastq
> ~~~
> 
> 
> ~~~
> @MISEQ-LAB244-W7:91:000000000-A5C7L:1:1101:13417:1998 2:N:0:TCGNAG
> CGCGATCAGCAGCGGCCCGGAACCGGTCAGCCGCGCCNTGGGGTTCAGCACCGGCNNGGCGAAGGCCGCGATCGCGGCGGCGGCGATCAGGCAGCGCAGCAGCAGGAGCCACCAGGGCGTGCGGTCGGGCGTCCGTTCGGCGTCCTCGCGCCCCAGCAGCAGGCGCACGCCAGGGAATCCGACCCGCCGCCGGCTCGGCCGCGTCNCCCGCNCCCGCCCCCCGAGCACCCGNAGCCNCNCCACCGCCGCCC
> +
> 1>AAADAAFFF1G11AA0000AAFE/AAE0FBAEGGG#B/>EF/EGHHHHHHG?C##???/FE/ECHCE?C<FGGGGCCCGGGG@?AE.BFFEAB-9@@@FFFFFEEEEFBFF--99A-;@B=@A@@?@@>-@@--/B--@--@@-F----;@--:F---9-AB9=-@-9E-99A-;:BF-9-@@-;@-@#############################################################
> ~~~
> 
> 
> Most of the nucleotides are correct, although we have some unknown bases (N). This is actually a good read!
> 
> Line 4 shows the quality for each nucleotide in the read. Quality is interpreted as the 
> probability of an incorrect base call (e.g. 1 in 10) or, equivalently, the base call 
> accuracy (e.g. 90%). To make it possible to line up each individual nucleotide with its quality
> score, the numerical score is converted into a code where each individual character 
> represents the numerical quality score for an individual nucleotide. For example, in the line
> above, the quality score line is: 
> 
> ~~~
> !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!#!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
> ~~~
> 
> 
> The `#` character and each of the `!` characters represent the encoded quality for an 
> individual nucleotide. The numerical value assigned to each of these characters depends on the 
> sequencing platform that generated the reads. The sequencing machine used to generate our data 
> uses the standard Sanger quality PHRED score encoding, Illumina version 1.8 onwards.
> Each character is assigned a quality score between 0 and 42 as shown in the chart below.
> 
> ~~~
> Quality encoding: !"#$%&'()\*+,-./0123456789:;<=>?@ABCDEFGHIJK
>                   |         |         |         |         |
> Quality score:    0........10........20........30........40..                          
> ~~~
> 
> 
> Each quality score represents the probability that the corresponding nucleotide call is
> incorrect. This quality score is logarithmically based, so a quality score of 10 reflects a
> base call accuracy of 90%, but a quality score of 20 reflects a base call accuracy of 99%. 
> These probability values are the results from the base calling algorithm and dependent on how 
> much signal was captured for the base incorporation. 
> 
> Looking back at our read: 
> 
> ~~~
> @MISEQ-LAB244-W7:91:000000000-A5C7L:1:1101:13417:1998 2:N:0:TCGNAG
> CGCGATCAGCAGCGGCCCGGAACCGGTCAGCCGCGCCNT
> +
> 1>AAADAAFFF1G11AA0000AAFE/AAE0FBAEGGG#B
> ~~~
> 
> 
> We can now see that the quality of each of the `N`s is 0 and the quality of the only
> nucleotide call (`C`) is also very poor (`#` = a quality score of 2). This is indeed a very
> bad read. 

## Creating, moving, copying, and removing

Now we can move around in the file structure, look at files, and search files. But what if we want to copy files or move
them around or get rid of them? Most of the time, you can do these sorts of file manipulations without the command line,
but there will be some cases (like when you're working with a remote computer like we are for this lesson) where it will be
impossible. You'll also find that you may be working with hundreds of files and want to do similar manipulations to all 
of those files. In cases like this, it's much faster to do these operations at the command line.

### Copying Files

When working with computational data, it's important to keep a safe copy of that data that can't be accidentally overwritten or deleted. 
For this lesson, our raw data is our FASTQ files.  We don't want to accidentally change the original files, so we'll make a copy of them
and change the file permissions so that we can read from, but not write to, the files.

First, let's make a copy of one of our FASTQ files using the `cp` command. 

Navigate to the `/workspaces/codespace-metagenomics-shell/dc_workshop/data/untrimmed_fastq` directory and enter:

~~~
$ cp JC1A_R2.fastq JC1A_R2-copy.fastq
$ ls -F
~~~

~~~
JC1A_R1.fastq  JC1A_R2-copy.fastq  JC1A_R2.fastq  JP4D_R1.fastq  JP4D_R2.fastq  TruSeq3-PE.fa
~~~

We now have two copies of the `JC1A_R2.fastq` file, one of them named `JC1A_R2-copy.fastq`. We'll move this file to a new directory
called `backup` where we'll store our backup data files.

### Creating Directories

The `mkdir` command is used to make a directory. Enter `mkdir`
followed by a space, then the directory name you want to create.

~~~
$ mkdir backup
~~~

### Moving / Renaming 

We can now move our backup file to this directory. We can
move files around using the command `mv`. 

~~~
$ mv JC1A_R2-copy.fastq backup
$ ls backup
~~~
 
~~~
JC1A_R2-copy.fastq
~~~

The `mv` command is also how you rename files. Let's rename this file to make it clear that this is a backup.

~~~
$ cd backup
$ mv JC1A_R2-copy.fastq JC1A_R2-backup.fastq
$ ls
~~~

~~~
JC1A_R2-backup.fastq
~~~


### Removing

When we want to remove a file or a directory we use the `rm` command. By default, `rm`will not delete directories.
You can tell `rm` to delete a directory using the `-r` (recursive) option. 

Let's delete the backup directory we just made. 
~~~
$ cd ..
$ rm -r backup
~~~

This will delete not only the directory, but all files within the directory. If you have write-protected files in the directory, 
you will be asked whether you want to override your permission settings. 


If we want to modify a write-protected file, you'll be asked if you want to override your file permissions.
for example:

~~~
rm: remove write-protected regular file ‘example.fastq’? 
~~~

If you enter `n` (for no), the file will not be deleted. If you enter `y`, you will delete the file. This gives us an extra 
measure of security, as there is one more step between us and deleting our data files.

**Important**: The `rm` command permanently removes the file. Be careful with this command. It doesn't
just nicely put the files in the Trash. They're really gone.

> ## Exercise 1: Make backup folder with write-protected permissions
>
> Starting in the `/workspaces/codespace-metagenomics-shell/dc_workshop/data/untrimmed_fastq` directory, do the following:
> 1. Make sure that you have deleted your backup directory and all files it contains.  
> 2. Create a copy of each of your FASTQ files. (Note: You'll need to do this individually for each of the four FASTQ files. We haven't
> learned yet how to do this
> with a wildcard.)  
> 3. Use a wildcard to move all of your backup files to a new backup directory.   
> 4. Change the permissions on all of your backup files to be write-protected.  
>
> > ## Solution
> >
> > 1. `rm -r backup`  
> > 2. `cp JC1A_R1.fastq JC1A_R1-backup.fastq`, `cp JC1A_R2.fastq JC1A_R2-backup.fastq`, `cp JP4D_R1.fastq JP4D_R1-backup.fastq`  
> > and `cp JP4D_R2.fastq JP4D_R2-backup.fastq` 
> > 3. `mkdir backup` and `mv *-backup.fastq backup`
> > 4. `chmod -w backup/*-backup.fastq`   
> > It's always a good idea to check your work with `ls -l backup`. You should see something like: 
> > 
> > ~~~
> > -r--r--r-- 1 vscode vscode  24203913 Jun 17 23:08 JC1A_R1-backup.fastq
> > -r--r--r-- 1 vscode vscode  24917444 Jun 17 23:10 JC1A_R2-backup.fastq
> > -r--r--r-- 1 vscode vscode 186962503 Jun 17 23:10 JP4D_R1-backup.fastq
> > -r--r--r-- 1 vscode vscode 212161034 Jun 17 23:10 JP4D_R2-backup.fastq
> > ~~~
> > 
> 

---

## Key Points
- You can view file contents using `less`, `cat`, `head` or `tail`.
- The commands `cp`, `mv`, and `mkdir` are useful for manipulating existing files and creating new directories.
- You can view file permissions using `ls -l` and change permissions using `chmod`.
- The `history` command and the up arrow on your keyboard can be used to repeat recently used commands.

---

[Previous lesson: Navigating Files and Directories (02-the-filesystem.md)](02-the-filesystem.md) | [Next lesson: Redirection (04-redirection.md)](04-redirection.md)

Commit message:

Update exercises for conda environment and separate out exercise

lessons/03-working-with-files.md, after:

<!-- If you are in VS-Code, click in this window and do Shift-Ctrl/Command-V to view      -->
<!-- rendered text and links. This will open an editor tab labeled "Preview [this file]"  -->

# Working with Files and Directories

[Previous lesson: Navigating Files and Directories (02-the-filesystem.md)](02-the-filesystem.md) | [Next lesson: Redirection (04-redirection.md)](04-redirection.md)



<!-- >> Teaching: 30 min | Exercises: 15 min -->

## Questions

- How can I view and search file contents?

- How can I create, copy and delete files and directories?

- How can I control who has permission to modify a file?

- How can I repeat recently used commands?


## Objectives

- View, search within, copy, move, and rename files. Create new directories.

- Use wildcards (`*`) to perform operations on multiple files.

- Make a file read only

- Use the `history` command to view and repeat recently used commands.



## Working with Files

### Wildcards

Now that we know how to navigate around our directory structure, let's
start working with **our sequencing files**. We did a sequencing experiment and 
have four result files, which are stored in our `untrimmed_fastq` directory. 

Navigate to your `untrimmed_fastq` directory.

~~~
$ cd dc_workshop/data/untrimmed_fastq
~~~

We are interested in looking at the FASTQ files in this directory. Remember, gunzipped the fastq.gz files in lesson 1, which replaced all of the .fastq.gz compressed files (binary) with .fastq files (text). We can list
all files with the `.fastq` extension using the command:

~~~
$ ls *.fastq
~~~

~~~
JC1A_R1.fastq JC1A_R2.fastq JP4D_R1.fastq JP4D_R2.fastq
~~~

The `*` character is a special type of character called a wildcard, which can be used to represent any number of any type of character. 
Thus, `*.fastq` matches every file that ends with `.fastq`. 

This command: 

~~~
$ ls *R1.fastq
~~~

~~~
JC1A_R1.fastq JP4D_R1.fastq
~~~

lists only the file that ends with `R1.fastq`.

## Command History

If you want to repeat a command that you've run recently, you can access previous
commands using the up arrow on your keyboard to go back to the most recent
command. Likewise, the down arrow takes you forward in the command history.

A few more useful shortcuts: 

- <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>+<kbd>C</kbd> will cancel the command you are writing, and give you a 
fresh prompt.
- <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>+<kbd>R</kbd> will do a reverse-search through your command history.  This
is very useful.
- <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>+<kbd>L</kbd> or the `clear` command will clear your screen.

You can also review your recent commands with the `history` command, by entering:

~~~
$ history
~~~

to see a numbered list of recent commands. You can reuse one of these commands
directly by referring to the number of that command.

For example, if your history looked like this:

~~~
259  ls *
260  ls /usr/bin/*.sh
261  ls *R1*fastq
~~~

then you could repeat command #260 by entering:

~~~
$ !260
~~~

Type `!` (exclamation point) and then the number of the command from your history.
You will be glad you learned this when you need to re-run very complicated commands.

## Examining Files

We now know how to switch directories, run programs, and look at the
contents of directories, but how do we look at the contents of files?

One way to examine a file is to print out on the screen all of the
contents using the program `cat`.
~~~
$ cat JC1A_R2.fastq
~~~

`cat` is a terrific program, but, as you just saw if you ran the command, when the file is really big (as the files we have), it can
be annoying to use. You can always use Ctrl+C to stop the command.  

The program, `less`, is useful for this
case. `less` opens the file as read only, and lets you navigate through it. The navigation commands
are identical to the `man` program.

Enter the following command:

~~~
$ less JC1A_R2.fastq
~~~

Some navigation commands in `less`

| key     | action |
| ------- | ---------- |
| <kbd>Space</kbd> | to go forward |
|  <kbd>b</kbd>    | to go backward |
|  <kbd>g</kbd>    | to go to the beginning |
|  <kbd>G</kbd>    | to go to the end |
|  <kbd>q</kbd>    | to quit |

`less` also gives you a way of searching through files. Use the
"/" key to begin a search. Enter the word you would like
to search for and press `enter`. The screen will jump to the next location where
that word is found. 

**Shortcut:** If you hit "/" then "enter", `less` will  repeat
the previous search. `less` searches from the current location and
works its way forward. Note, if you are at the end of the file and search
for the sequence "CAA", `less` will not find it. You either need to go to the
beginning of the file (by typing `g`) and search again using `/` or you
can use `?` to search backwards in the same way you used `/` previously.

For instance, let's search forward for the sequence `TTTTT` in our file. 
You can see that we go right to that sequence, what it looks like,
and where it is in the file. If you continue to type `/` and hit return, you will move 
forward to the next instance of this sequence motif. If you instead type `?` and hit 
return, you will search backwards and move up the file to previous examples of this motif.

Remember, the `man` program actually uses `less` internally and
therefore uses the same commands, so you can search documentation
using "/" as well!

There's another way that we can look at files, and in this case, just
look at part of them. This can be particularly useful if we just want
to see the beginning or end of the file, or see how it's formatted.

The commands are `head` and `tail` and they let you look at
the beginning and end of a file, respectively.

~~~
$ head JC1A_R2.fastq
~~~

~~~
@MISEQ-LAB244-W7:91:000000000-A5C7L:1:1101:13417:1998 2:N:0:TCGNAG
CGCGATCAGCAGCGGCCCGGAACCGGTCAGCCGCGCCNTGGGGTTCAGCACCGGCNNGGCGAAGGCCGCGATCGCGGCGGCGGCGATCAGGCAGCGCAGCAGCAGGAGCCACCAGGGCGTGCGGTCGGGCGTCCGTTCGGCGTCCTCGCGCCCCAGCAGCAGGCGCACGCCAGGGAATCCGACCCGCCGCCGGCTCGGCCGCGTCNCCCGCNCCCGCCCCCCGAGCACCCGNAGCCNCNCCACCGCCGCCC
+
1>AAADAAFFF1G11AA0000AAFE/AAE0FBAEGGG#B/>EF/EGHHHHHHG?C##???/FE/ECHCE?C<FGGGGCCCGGGG@?AE.BFFEAB-9@@@FFFFFEEEEFBFF--99A-;@B=@A@@?@@>-@@--/B--@--@@-F----;@--:F---9-AB9=-@-9E-99A-;:BF-9-@@-;@-@#############################################################
@MISEQ-LAB244-W7:91:000000000-A5C7L:1:1101:15782:2187 2:N:0:TCGAAG
CAACCGGCTGATCCTCGACGCCATCGAGGCGACCGGCGCCGGCGCCGACGGGCTGATCACCGCCGCCGAGGTCGTCGCGATCAACGCGGCGATCCGCGGCGACGCGACGCCCCTCGCCGACTTCGTCGACCTGCACGGCGACGACGAGGAGGGCCTCGAGACCGGCTTCCCCCTGATCCAGGGCGACGGCGCCGCGACGCAGCTCGGCGGGTTCCACCCTCCTCACCGGGCCGCCGCCGGCTTCTACCCGA
+
BBBBBBBBDBFFGGFFEEGEFG2FHGFEGCA?EEGCE@EFEEE/EEE@EDCFDCAC2G2CG?CC/CFG?C?DHFCGCGFD-C.0;DFA-AD;AFFFF;DF-BB--@;>9D-@DAD->>=-@-9FFBDCFFFFB?.FE@---;@9@--9@9AD;D?.F.9..AE;C;-;;B.;D##############################################################################
@MISEQ-LAB244-W7:91:000000000-A5C7L:1:1101:11745:2196 2:N:0:NCGAAG
CGAAAAGCCGCGCGCCGACCTGGGCGTCGAGCGCCGCGCCGCTCCAACGAACGCCAGGCGATCCGAGCGCGGCGGCGATGGCACCCGGATCGAGCCCGGTAAAGTCGGCCCGTAGGTCGAGGCCGCCGCCGCCAGGCGCCACTTCGAGCCGTGGGAGATGCAACGTTAGCGGCGCCGCCCCGTCGGCCGTCTCGAGCAAAATGCGCGTGTCGGTGAGCCGCCGGTGCTCCGGCAACCGCATCCTGCGCCAG

~~~

~~~
$ tail JC1A_R2.fastq
~~~

~~~
+SRR098026.247 HWUSI-EAS1599_1:2:1:2:1311 length=35
#!##!#################!!!!!!!######
@SRR098026.248 HWUSI-EAS1599_1:2:1:2:118 length=35
GNTGNGGTCATCATACGCGCCCNNNNNNNGGCATG
+SRR098026.248 HWUSI-EAS1599_1:2:1:2:118 length=35
B!;?!A=5922:##########!!!!!!!######
@SRR098026.249 HWUSI-EAS1599_1:2:1:2:1057 length=35
CNCTNTATGCGTACGGCAGTGANNNNNNNGGAGAT
+SRR098026.249 HWUSI-EAS1599_1:2:1:2:1057 length=35
A!@B!BBB@ABAB#########!!!!!!!######
~~~

The `-n` option to either of these commands can be used to print the
first or last `n` lines of a file. 

~~~
$ head -n 1 JC1A_R2.fastq
~~~

~~~
@MISEQ-LAB244-W7:91:000000000-A5C7L:1:1101:13417:1998 2:N:0:TCGNAG
~~~

~~~
$ tail -n 1 JC1A_R2.fastq
~~~

~~~
AAA#>>A#1>AAGGGGGGGG#ABFEFGGHGEFGEGGGEGFHHHGGGGGGGGEEEEEGCG?EGHHHG@CC#??#???FFG############################################################################################################################################################################
~~~


> ## Details on the FASTQ format
> Since we are learning while using FASTQ files, let's understand what they are.
> Although it looks complicated (and it is), it's easy to understand the
> [fastq](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FASTQ_format) format with a little decoding. Some rules about the format
> include...
> 
> |Line|Description|
> |----|-----------|
> |1|Always begins with '@' and then information about the read|
> |2|The actual DNA sequence|
> |3|Always begins with a '+' and sometimes the same info in line 1|
> |4|Has a string of characters which represent the quality scores; must have same number of characters as line 2|
> 
> We can view the first complete read in one of the files our dataset by using `head` to look at
> the first four lines.
> 
> ~~~
> $ head -n 4 JC1A_R2.fastq
> ~~~
> 
> 
> ~~~
> @MISEQ-LAB244-W7:91:000000000-A5C7L:1:1101:13417:1998 2:N:0:TCGNAG
> CGCGATCAGCAGCGGCCCGGAACCGGTCAGCCGCGCCNTGGGGTTCAGCACCGGCNNGGCGAAGGCCGCGATCGCGGCGGCGGCGATCAGGCAGCGCAGCAGCAGGAGCCACCAGGGCGTGCGGTCGGGCGTCCGTTCGGCGTCCTCGCGCCCCAGCAGCAGGCGCACGCCAGGGAATCCGACCCGCCGCCGGCTCGGCCGCGTCNCCCGCNCCCGCCCCCCGAGCACCCGNAGCCNCNCCACCGCCGCCC
> +
> 1>AAADAAFFF1G11AA0000AAFE/AAE0FBAEGGG#B/>EF/EGHHHHHHG?C##???/FE/ECHCE?C<FGGGGCCCGGGG@?AE.BFFEAB-9@@@FFFFFEEEEFBFF--99A-;@B=@A@@?@@>-@@--/B--@--@@-F----;@--:F---9-AB9=-@-9E-99A-;:BF-9-@@-;@-@#############################################################
> ~~~
> 
> 
> Most of the nucleotides are correct, although we have some unknown bases (N). This is actually a good read!
> 
> Line 4 shows the quality for each nucleotide in the read. Quality is interpreted as the 
> probability of an incorrect base call (e.g. 1 in 10) or, equivalently, the base call 
> accuracy (e.g. 90%). To make it possible to line up each individual nucleotide with its quality
> score, the numerical score is converted into a code where each individual character 
> represents the numerical quality score for an individual nucleotide. For example, in the line
> above, the quality score line is: 
> 
> ~~~
> !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!#!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
> ~~~
> 
> 
> The `#` character and each of the `!` characters represent the encoded quality for an 
> individual nucleotide. The numerical value assigned to each of these characters depends on the 
> sequencing platform that generated the reads. The sequencing machine used to generate our data 
> uses the standard Sanger quality PHRED score encoding, Illumina version 1.8 onwards.
> Each character is assigned a quality score between 0 and 42 as shown in the chart below.
> 
> ~~~
> Quality encoding: !"#$%&'()\*+,-./0123456789:;<=>?@ABCDEFGHIJK
>                   |         |         |         |         |
> Quality score:    0........10........20........30........40..                          
> ~~~
> 
> 
> Each quality score represents the probability that the corresponding nucleotide call is
> incorrect. This quality score is logarithmically based, so a quality score of 10 reflects a
> base call accuracy of 90%, but a quality score of 20 reflects a base call accuracy of 99%. 
> These probability values are the results from the base calling algorithm and dependent on how 
> much signal was captured for the base incorporation. 
> 
> Looking back at our read: 
> 
> ~~~
> @MISEQ-LAB244-W7:91:000000000-A5C7L:1:1101:13417:1998 2:N:0:TCGNAG
> CGCGATCAGCAGCGGCCCGGAACCGGTCAGCCGCGCCNT
> +
> 1>AAADAAFFF1G11AA0000AAFE/AAE0FBAEGGG#B
> ~~~
> 
> 
> We can now see that the quality of each of the `N`s is 0 and the quality of the only
> nucleotide call (`C`) is also very poor (`#` = a quality score of 2). This is indeed a very
> bad read. 

## Creating, moving, copying, and removing

Now we can move around in the file structure, look at files, and search files. But what if we want to copy files or move
them around or get rid of them? Most of the time, you can do these sorts of file manipulations without the command line,
but there will be some cases (like when you're working with a remote computer like we are for this lesson) where it will be
impossible. You'll also find that you may be working with hundreds of files and want to do similar manipulations to all 
of those files. In cases like this, it's much faster to do these operations at the command line.

### Copying Files

When working with computational data, it's important to keep a safe copy of that data that can't be accidentally overwritten or deleted. 
For this lesson, our raw data is our FASTQ files.  We don't want to accidentally change the original files, so we'll make a copy of them
and change the file permissions so that we can read from, but not write to, the files.

First, let's make a copy of one of our FASTQ files using the `cp` command. 

Navigate to the `/workspaces/codespace-metagenomics-shell/dc_workshop/data/untrimmed_fastq` directory and enter:

~~~
$ cp JC1A_R2.fastq JC1A_R2-copy.fastq
$ ls -F
~~~

~~~
JC1A_R1.fastq  JC1A_R2-copy.fastq  JC1A_R2.fastq  JP4D_R1.fastq  JP4D_R2.fastq  TruSeq3-PE.fa
~~~

We now have two copies of the `JC1A_R2.fastq` file, one of them named `JC1A_R2-copy.fastq`. We'll move this file to a new directory
called `backup` where we'll store our backup data files.

### Creating Directories

The `mkdir` command is used to make a directory. Enter `mkdir`
followed by a space, then the directory name you want to create.

~~~
$ mkdir backup
~~~

### Moving / Renaming 

We can now move our backup file to this directory. We can
move files around using the command `mv`. 

~~~
$ mv JC1A_R2-copy.fastq backup
$ ls backup
~~~
 
~~~
JC1A_R2-copy.fastq
~~~

The `mv` command is also how you rename files. Let's rename this file to make it clear that this is a backup.

~~~
$ cd backup
$ mv JC1A_R2-copy.fastq JC1A_R2-backup.fastq
$ ls
~~~

~~~
JC1A_R2-backup.fastq
~~~


### Removing

When we want to remove a file or a directory we use the `rm` command. By default, `rm`will not delete directories.
You can tell `rm` to delete a directory using the `-r` (recursive) option. 

Let's delete the backup directory we just made. 
~~~
$ cd ..
$ rm -r backup
~~~

This will delete not only the directory, but all files within the directory. If you have write-protected files in the directory, 
you will be asked whether you want to override your permission settings. 


If we want to modify a write-protected file, you'll be asked if you want to override your file permissions.
for example:

~~~
rm: remove write-protected regular file ‘example.fastq’? 
~~~

If you enter `n` (for no), the file will not be deleted. If you enter `y`, you will delete the file. This gives us an extra 
measure of security, as there is one more step between us and deleting our data files.

**Important**: The `rm` command permanently removes the file. Be careful with this command. It doesn't
just nicely put the files in the Trash. They're really gone.

> ## Exercise 1: Make backup folder with write-protected permissions
>
> Starting in the `/workspaces/codespace-metagenomics-shell/dc_workshop/data/untrimmed_fastq` directory, do the following:
> 1. Make sure that you have deleted your backup directory and all files it contains.  
> 2. Create a copy of each of your FASTQ files. (Note: You'll need to do this individually for each of the four FASTQ files. We haven't
> learned yet how to do this
> with a wildcard.)  
> 3. Use a wildcard to move all of your backup files to a new backup directory.   
> 4. Change the permissions on all of your backup files to be write-protected.  
>
> 
> [See solution to exercise 1](03-working-with-files-exercises/Exercise-1-solution.md)
> 

---

## Key Points
- You can view file contents using `less`, `cat`, `head` or `tail`.
- The commands `cp`, `mv`, and `mkdir` are useful for manipulating existing files and creating new directories.
- You can view file permissions using `ls -l` and change permissions using `chmod`.
- The `history` command and the up arrow on your keyboard can be used to repeat recently used commands.

---

[Previous lesson: Navigating Files and Directories (02-the-filesystem.md)](02-the-filesystem.md) | [Next lesson: Redirection (04-redirection.md)](04-redirection.md)
