lessons/05-writing-scripts.md, before:

# Writing Scripts and Working with Data

> Teaching: 20 min | Exercises: 20 min

## Questions

- How can we automate a commonly used set of commands?

- How can we transfer files between local and remote computers?


## Objectives

- Use the `nano` text editor to modify text files.

- Write a basic shell script.

- Use the `bash` command to execute a shell script.

- Use `chmod` to make a script an executable program.



<script language="javascript" type="text/javascript">
function set_page_view_defaults() {
    document.getElementById('div_win').style.display = 'block';
    document.getElementById('div_unix').style.display = 'none';
};

function change_content_by_platform(form_control){
    if (!form_control || document.getElementById(form_control).value == 'win') {
        set_page_view_defaults();
    } else if (document.getElementById(form_control).value == 'unix') {
        document.getElementById('div_win').style.display = 'none';
        document.getElementById('div_unix').style.display = 'block';
    } else {
        alert("Error: Missing platform value for 'change_content_by_platform()' script!");
    }
}

window.onload = set_page_view_defaults;
</script>


## Writing files

We have been able to do much work with existing files, but what if we want to write our own files? We are not going to type in a FASTA file, but we will see as we go through other tutorials; there are many reasons we will want to write a file or edit an existing file.

We will use a text editor called Nano to add text to files. We are going to create a file to take notes about what we have been doing with the data files in `~/dc_workshopd/data/untrimmed_fastq`.

Taking notes is good practice when working in bioinformatics. We can create a file called a `README.txt` that describes the data files in the directory or documents how the files in that directory were generated. As the name suggests, it is a file that others should read to understand the information in that directory.

Let's change our working directory to `~/dc_workshop/data/untrimmed_fastq` using `cd`,
then run `nano` to create a file called `README.txt`:

~~~
$ cd ~/dc_workshop/data/untrimmed_fastq
$ nano README.txt
~~~

You should see something like this: 

<a href="../fig/02-05-01.png">
  <img src="../fig/02-05-01.png" alt="nano screen with the name of the file in the top bar, a blank screen to write in the middle, and a bottom bar with the shortcuts for the available nano instructions." />
</a>
<em> Figure 1. GNU Nano Text Editor Menu. <em/>

The text at the bottom of the screen shows the keyboard shortcuts for performing various tasks in `nano`. We will talk more about how to interpret this information soon.

> ## Which Editor?
>
> When we say, "`nano` is a text editor," we really do mean "text": it can
> only work with plain character data, not tables, images, or any other
> human-friendly media. We use it in examples because it is one of the 
> least complex text editors. However, because of this trait, it may 
> not be powerful enough or flexible enough for the work you need to do
> after this workshop. On Unix systems (such as Linux and Mac OS X),
> many programmers use [Emacs](http://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/) or
> [Vim](http://www.vim.org/) (both of which require more time to learn), 
> or a graphical editor such as
> [Gedit](http://projects.gnome.org/gedit/). On Windows, you may wish to
> use [Notepad++](http://notepad-plus-plus.org/). Windows also has a built-in
> editor called `notepad` that can be run from the command line in the same
> way as `nano` for the purposes of this lesson.  
>
> No matter what editor you use, you need to know where it searches
> for and saves files. If you start it from the shell, it will (probably)
> use your current working directory as its default location. If you use
> your computer's start menu, it may want to save files in your desktop or
> documents directory instead. You can change this by navigating to
> another directory the first time you "Save As..."

Let us type in a few lines of text. Describe the files in this directory or what you have been doing with them.
    <a href="../fig/02-05-02.png">
  <img src="../fig/02-05-02.png" alt="The same screen as before but now it has text in the middle part." />
</a>
<em> Figure 2. For example, the README file is written in nano. <em/>
    
Once we are happy with our text, we can press <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>-<kbd>O</kbd> (press the <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> or <kbd>Control</kbd> key and, while
holding it down, press the <kbd>O</kbd> key) to write our data to disk. You will be asked what file we want to save this to:
Press <kbd>Return</kbd> to accept the suggested default of `README.txt`.

Once our file is saved, we can use <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>-<kbd>X</kbd> to quit the editor and
return to the shell.

> ## Control, Ctrl, or ^ Key
>
> The Control key is also called the "Ctrl" key. There are various ways
> in which using the Control key may be described. For example, you may
> see an instruction to press the <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> key and, while holding it down,
> press the <kbd>X</kbd> key, described as any of:
>
> * `Control-X`
> * `Control+X`
> * `Ctrl-X`
> * `Ctrl+X`
> * `^X`
> * `C-x`
>
> In `nano`, along the bottom of the screen, you will see `^G Get Help ^O WriteOut`.
> This means that you can use <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>-<kbd>G</kbd> to get help and <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>-<kbd>O</kbd> to save your
> file.

Now you have written a file. You can look at it with `less` or `cat`, or open it up again and edit it with `nano`.

> ## Exercise 1: Edit a file with nano
>
> Open `README.txt`, add the date to the top of the file, and save the file. 
>
> > ## Solution
> > 
> > ~~~
> > Use `nano README.txt` to open the file.  
> > Add today's date and then use <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>-<kbd>X</kbd> to exit and `y` to save.
> >
> > ~~~
> > {: .bash}
> {: .solution}

## Writing scripts

A really powerful thing about the command line is that you can write scripts. Scripts let you save commands to run them and also lets you put multiple commands together. Though writing scripts may require an additional time investment initially, this can save you time as you run them repeatedly. Scripts can also address the challenge of reproducibility: if you need to repeat analysis, you retain a record of your command history within the script.

One thing we will commonly want to do with sequencing results is pull out bad reads and write them to a file to see if we can figure out what is going on with them. We are going to look for reads with long sequences of N's like we did before, but now we are going to write a script, so we can run it each time we get new sequences rather than type the code in by hand each time.

Bad reads have a lot of N's, so we are going to look for  `NNNNNNNNNN` with `grep`. We want the whole FASTQ record, so we are also going to get the one line above the sequence and the two lines below. We also want to look at all the files that end with `.fastq`, so we will use the `*` wildcard.

~~~
grep -B1 -A2 NNNNNNNNNN *.fastq > scripted_bad_reads.txt
~~~

We are going to create a new file to put this command in. We will call it `bad-reads-script.sh`. The `sh` is not required, but using that extension tells us it is a shell script.

~~~
$ nano bad-reads-script.sh
~~~

Type your `grep` command into the file and save it as before. Be careful not to add the `$` at the beginning of the line.

Now comes the neat part. We can run this script. Type:

~~~
$ bash bad-reads-script.sh
~~~

It will look like nothing happened, but now if you look at `scripted_bad_reads.txt`, you can see that there are now reads in the file.


> ## Exercise 2: Edit a script
>
> We want the script to tell us when it is done.  
> 
> > ## Solution
> > 
> > ~~~
> >1. Open `bad-reads-script.sh` and add the line `echo "Script finished!"` after the `grep` command and save the file.  
> >2. Run the updated script.
> > ~~~
> > {: .bash}
> {: .solution}

## Making the script into a program

We had to type `bash` because we needed to tell the computer what program to use to run this script. Instead, we can turn this script into its own program. We need to tell it that it is a program by making it executable. We can do this by changing the file permissions. We talked about permissions in [an earlier episode](https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/shell-metagenomics/02-the-filesystem/index.html).

First, let us look at the current permissions.

~~~
$ ls -l bad-reads-script.sh
~~~

~~~
-rw-rw-r-- 1 dcuser dcuser 0 Oct 25 21:46 bad-reads-script.sh
~~~

We see that it says `-rw-r--r--`. This combination shows that the file can be read by any user and written to by the file owner (you). We want to change these permissions so the file can be executed as a program. We use the command `chmod` as we did earlier when we removed write permissions. Here we are adding (`+`) executable permissions (`+x`).

~~~
$ chmod +x bad-reads-script.sh
~~~

Now let us look at the permissions again.

~~~
$ ls -l bad-reads-script.sh
~~~

~~~
-rwxrwxr-x 1 dcuser dcuser 0 Oct 25 21:46 bad-reads-script.sh
~~~

Now we see that it says `-rwxr-xr-x`. The `x`'s there now tell us we can run it as a program. So, let us try it! We will need to put `./` at the beginning, so the computer knows to look here in this directory for the program.

~~~
$ ./bad-reads-script.sh
~~~

The script should run the same way as before, but now we have created our own computer program!

It is good practice to keep any large files compressed while not using them. In this way, you save storage space; you will see that you will appreciate it when you advance your analysis. So, since we will not use the FASTQ files for now, let us compress them. Moreover, run `ls -lh` to confirm that they are compressed. 

~~~
$ gzip ~/dc_workshop/data/untrimmed_fastq/*.fastq
$ ls -lh  ~/dc_workshop/data/untrimmed_fastq/*.fastq.gz
~~~

~~~
total 428M
-rw-r--r-- 1 dcuser dcuser  24M Nov 26 12:36 JC1A_R1.fastq.gz
-rw-r--r-- 1 dcuser dcuser  24M Nov 26 12:37 JC1A_R2.fastq.gz
-rw-r--r-- 1 dcuser dcuser 179M Nov 26 12:44 JP4D_R1.fastq.gz
-rw-r--r-- 1 dcuser dcuser 203M Nov 26 12:51 JP4D_R2.fastq.gz
~~~

## Moving and downloading data

So far, we have worked with pre-loaded data on the instance in the cloud. Usually, however,
most analyses begin with moving data onto the instance. Below we will show you some commands to 
download data onto your instance or to move data between your computer and the cloud.

### Getting data from the cloud

Two programs will download data from a remote server to your local
(or remote) machine: ``wget`` and ``curl``. They were designed to do slightly different
tasks by default, so you will need to give the programs somewhat different options to get
the same behavior, but they are mostly interchangeable.

 - ``wget`` is short for "world wide web get", and its basic function is to *download*

 - ``cURL`` is a pun. It is supposed to be read as "see URL", so its primary function is
 to *display* webpages or data at a web address.

Which one you need to use mainly depends on your operating system, as most computers will
only have one or the other installed by default.

Let us say you want to download some data from Ensembl. We will download a tiny
tab-delimited file that tells us what data is available on the Ensembl bacteria server.
Before starting our download, we need to know whether we are using ``curl`` or ``wget``.

To see which program you have, type:
 
~~~
$ which curl
$ which wget
~~~

``which`` is a BASH program that looks through everything you have
installed and tells you what folder it is installed to. If it cannot
find the program you asked for, it returns nothing, i.e., it gives you no
results.

On Mac OSX, you will likely get the following output:

~~~
$ which curl
~~~

~~~
/usr/bin/curl
~~~

~~~
$ which wget
~~~

~~~
$
~~~

This output means that you have ``curl`` installed but not ``wget``.

Once you know whether you have ``curl`` or ``wget`` use one of the
following commands to download the file:

~~~
$ cd
$ wget ftp://ftp.ensemblgenomes.org/pub/release-37/bacteria/species_EnsemblBacteria.txt
~~~

or

~~~
$ cd
$ curl -O ftp://ftp.ensemblgenomes.org/pub/release-37/bacteria/species_EnsemblBacteria.txt
~~~

Since we wanted to *download* the file rather than view it, we used ``wget`` without
any modifiers. With ``curl`` however, we had to use the -O flag, which simultaneously tells ``curl`` to
download the page instead of showing it to us **and** specifies that it should save the
file using the same name it had on the server: species_EnsemblBacteria.txt

It's important to note that both ``curl`` and ``wget`` download to the computer that the
command line belongs to. So, if you are logged into AWS on the command line and execute
the ``curl`` command above in the AWS terminal, the file will be downloaded to your AWS
machine, not your local one.

### Moving files between your laptop and your instance

What if the data you need is on your local computer, but you need to get it *into* the
cloud? There are several ways to do this. While following this lesson, you may be using
the RStudio interface containing a terminal, some other terminal, or your own local computer. Depending on your setup, 
there are several alternatives to transfer the files. Here we describe how to use the RStudio interface 
to transfer files..
 
    
> ## Transferring files scenarios
> 1. If you are working on your **local** computer, there is no need to transfer files because you already have them locally.   
> In that case, you only need to know the directory you are working in.  
> 2. If you are working on a remote machine such as an AWS instance, you can use the `scp` command. In that case, it is *always* easier
to start the transfer locally. **If you are typing into a terminal, the terminal should not be logged into your instance. It should show your local computer. If you are using a transfer program, it needs to be installed on your local machine, not your instance.**     
> 3. If you are using the **RStudio server** from the AWS instance, you can transfer files between your local and your remote machine using the graphic interface of RStudio.  
    

### Downloading files in RStudio  
    
We will follow the next five steps to download files with the RStudio interface. 
    
1. First, we select the file to download from the bottom right panel.  
<a href="../fig/02-05-03.png">
  <img src="../fig/02-05-03.png" alt="Download data with R Studio." 
     width="826" 
     height="235"
     alt="Bottom right panel where the file menu is displayed. The file to download is selected." />
</a>
    
2. Then, we choose “More” to display more actions for the selected file.  
<a href="../fig/02-05-04.png">
  <img src="../fig/02-05-04.png" alt="Download data with R studio." 
     width="826" 
     height="235"
     alt="More button highlighted." />
</a>
    
3. Within the "More" menu, the “export” button should become available.  
<a href="../fig/02-05-05.png">
  <img src="../fig/02-05-05.png" alt="Download data with R studio." 
     width="826" 
     height="555"
     alt="Export button highlighted." />
</a>
    
4. An emergent window should be displayed on your screen where you can select the “Download” option.  
<a href="../fig/02-05-06.png">
  <img src="../fig/02-05-06.png" alt="Download data with R studio." 
     width="729" 
     height="399"
     alt="emergent window where you write the name of the file and click download." />
</a>  
    
5. Your file should now be downloaded to your local computer.  


### Upload files to AWS in RStudio  
    
Now that we learned how to download files from the RStudio interface, 
we will learn the opposite action, uploading files from your local computer
to your remote AWS machine.  
    
1. Choose the option 'Upload' in your RStudio interface.
<a href="../fig/02-05-08.png">
  <img src="../fig/02-05-08.png" alt="Upload data with R studio." 
     width="826" 
     height="235"
     alt="The Upload button is highlighted." />
</a>
    
2. After an emergent window is displayed on your screen, select “Select file”.
<a href="../fig/02-05-09.png">
  <img src="../fig/02-05-09.png" alt="Upload data with R studio." 
     width="636" 
     height="418"
       alt="Select filed button highlighted in the emergent window" />
</a>
    
3. A new screen is displayed on your computer where you should choose the file to upload. 
    Choose the file and click “open”.
<a href="../fig/02-05-10.png">
  <img src="../fig/02-05-10.png" alt="Upload data with R studio." 
     width="682" 
     height="460"
       alt="file to upload and open button are highlighted in the window of the local filesystem" />
</a>
    
4. Finally, if the file is correct, click “ok,” and the uploading will start.
    
5. Now, you can view a new file in your RStudio interface.
<a href="../fig/02-05-12.png">
  <img src="../fig/02-05-12.png" alt="Upload data with R studio." 
     width="800" 
     height="300" 
       alt="The uploaded file is shown in the R studio interface" />
</a>
    
 
### Transferring data between your local and virtual machine with `scp`  
    
`scp` stands for 'secure copy protocol' and is a widely used UNIX tool for moving files
between computers. The simplest way to use `scp` is to run it in your local terminal
and use it to copy a single file. While `scp <local-file-path> <AWS instance path>` will upload a local file into your AWS instance, 
`scp <AWS-instance-path> <local-file-path>` will move your file from your remote AWS instance into
your local computer. The general form of the `scp` command is the following:  
~~~
$ scp <file you want to move, local or remote> <path to where I want to move it, local or remote>
~~~

    
> ## Exercise 3: Uploading data with `scp`  
> Let us download the text file  `~/data/untrimmed_fastq/scripted_bad_reads.txt` from the remote machine to your local computer.
> Which of the following commands would download the file?  
> A)  
> ~~~
> $  scp local_file.txt dcuser@ip.address:/home/dcuser/
> ~~~
> {: .bash}
> B)  
> ~~~
> $ scp dcuser@ip.address:/home/dcuser/dc_workshop/data/untrimmed_fastq/scripted_bad_reads.txt. ~/Downloads
> ~~~
> {: .bash}
>
> > ## Solution
> >    A) False. This command will upload the file `local_file.txt` to the dcuser home directory in your AWS remote machine.  
> >    B) True. This option downloads the bad reads file in `~/data/scripted_bad_reads.txt` to your local `~/Downloads` directory
> >       **(make sure you use substitute dcuser@ ip.address with your remote login credentials)**
> {: .solution}

---

## Key Points
- Scripts are a collection of commands executed together.
- Scripts are executable text files.
- Nano is a text editor.
- In a terminal, `scp` transfers information to and from virtual and local computers.
- R studio remote interface allows the transfer of information between virtual and local computers.

Commit message:

change path and user mentions from AWS to Codespace

lessons/05-writing-scripts.md, after:

# Writing Scripts and Working with Data

> Teaching: 20 min | Exercises: 20 min

## Questions

- How can we automate a commonly used set of commands?

- How can we transfer files between local and remote computers?


## Objectives

- Use the `nano` text editor to modify text files.

- Write a basic shell script.

- Use the `bash` command to execute a shell script.

- Use `chmod` to make a script an executable program.



<script language="javascript" type="text/javascript">
function set_page_view_defaults() {
    document.getElementById('div_win').style.display = 'block';
    document.getElementById('div_unix').style.display = 'none';
};

function change_content_by_platform(form_control){
    if (!form_control || document.getElementById(form_control).value == 'win') {
        set_page_view_defaults();
    } else if (document.getElementById(form_control).value == 'unix') {
        document.getElementById('div_win').style.display = 'none';
        document.getElementById('div_unix').style.display = 'block';
    } else {
        alert("Error: Missing platform value for 'change_content_by_platform()' script!");
    }
}

window.onload = set_page_view_defaults;
</script>


## Writing files

We have been able to do much work with existing files, but what if we want to write our own files? We are not going to type in a FASTA file, but we will see as we go through other tutorials; there are many reasons we will want to write a file or edit an existing file.

We will use a text editor called Nano to add text to files. We are going to create a file to take notes about what we have been doing with the data files in `~/dc_workshopd/data/untrimmed_fastq`.

Taking notes is good practice when working in bioinformatics. We can create a file called a `README.txt` that describes the data files in the directory or documents how the files in that directory were generated. As the name suggests, it is a file that others should read to understand the information in that directory.

Let's change our working directory to `~/dc_workshop/data/untrimmed_fastq` using `cd`,
then run `nano` to create a file called `README.txt`:

~~~
$ cd ~/dc_workshop/data/untrimmed_fastq
$ nano README.txt
~~~

You should see something like this: 

<a href="../fig/02-05-01.png">
  <img src="../fig/02-05-01.png" alt="nano screen with the name of the file in the top bar, a blank screen to write in the middle, and a bottom bar with the shortcuts for the available nano instructions." />
</a>
<em> Figure 1. GNU Nano Text Editor Menu. <em/>

The text at the bottom of the screen shows the keyboard shortcuts for performing various tasks in `nano`. We will talk more about how to interpret this information soon.

> ## Which Editor?
>
> When we say, "`nano` is a text editor," we really do mean "text": it can
> only work with plain character data, not tables, images, or any other
> human-friendly media. We use it in examples because it is one of the 
> least complex text editors. However, because of this trait, it may 
> not be powerful enough or flexible enough for the work you need to do
> after this workshop. On Unix systems (such as Linux and Mac OS X),
> many programmers use [Emacs](http://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/) or
> [Vim](http://www.vim.org/) (both of which require more time to learn), 
> or a graphical editor such as
> [Gedit](http://projects.gnome.org/gedit/). On Windows, you may wish to
> use [Notepad++](http://notepad-plus-plus.org/). Windows also has a built-in
> editor called `notepad` that can be run from the command line in the same
> way as `nano` for the purposes of this lesson.  
>
> No matter what editor you use, you need to know where it searches
> for and saves files. If you start it from the shell, it will (probably)
> use your current working directory as its default location. If you use
> your computer's start menu, it may want to save files in your desktop or
> documents directory instead. You can change this by navigating to
> another directory the first time you "Save As..."

Let us type in a few lines of text. Describe the files in this directory or what you have been doing with them.
    <a href="../fig/02-05-02.png">
  <img src="../fig/02-05-02.png" alt="The same screen as before but now it has text in the middle part." />
</a>
<em> Figure 2. For example, the README file is written in nano. <em/>
    
Once we are happy with our text, we can press <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>-<kbd>O</kbd> (press the <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> or <kbd>Control</kbd> key and, while
holding it down, press the <kbd>O</kbd> key) to write our data to disk. You will be asked what file we want to save this to:
Press <kbd>Return</kbd> to accept the suggested default of `README.txt`.

Once our file is saved, we can use <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>-<kbd>X</kbd> to quit the editor and
return to the shell.

> ## Control, Ctrl, or ^ Key
>
> The Control key is also called the "Ctrl" key. There are various ways
> in which using the Control key may be described. For example, you may
> see an instruction to press the <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> key and, while holding it down,
> press the <kbd>X</kbd> key, described as any of:
>
> * `Control-X`
> * `Control+X`
> * `Ctrl-X`
> * `Ctrl+X`
> * `^X`
> * `C-x`
>
> In `nano`, along the bottom of the screen, you will see `^G Get Help ^O WriteOut`.
> This means that you can use <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>-<kbd>G</kbd> to get help and <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>-<kbd>O</kbd> to save your
> file.

Now you have written a file. You can look at it with `less` or `cat`, or open it up again and edit it with `nano`.

> ## Exercise 1: Edit a file with nano
>
> Open `README.txt`, add the date to the top of the file, and save the file. 
>
> > ## Solution
> > 
> > ~~~
> > Use `nano README.txt` to open the file.  
> > Add today's date and then use <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>-<kbd>X</kbd> to exit and `y` to save.
> >
> > ~~~
> > {: .bash}
> {: .solution}

## Writing scripts

A really powerful thing about the command line is that you can write scripts. Scripts let you save commands to run them and also lets you put multiple commands together. Though writing scripts may require an additional time investment initially, this can save you time as you run them repeatedly. Scripts can also address the challenge of reproducibility: if you need to repeat analysis, you retain a record of your command history within the script.

One thing we will commonly want to do with sequencing results is pull out bad reads and write them to a file to see if we can figure out what is going on with them. We are going to look for reads with long sequences of N's like we did before, but now we are going to write a script, so we can run it each time we get new sequences rather than type the code in by hand each time.

Bad reads have a lot of N's, so we are going to look for  `NNNNNNNNNN` with `grep`. We want the whole FASTQ record, so we are also going to get the one line above the sequence and the two lines below. We also want to look at all the files that end with `.fastq`, so we will use the `*` wildcard.

~~~
grep -B1 -A2 NNNNNNNNNN *.fastq > scripted_bad_reads.txt
~~~

We are going to create a new file to put this command in. We will call it `bad-reads-script.sh`. The `sh` is not required, but using that extension tells us it is a shell script.

~~~
$ nano bad-reads-script.sh
~~~

Type your `grep` command into the file and save it as before. Be careful not to add the `$` at the beginning of the line.

Now comes the neat part. We can run this script. Type:

~~~
$ bash bad-reads-script.sh
~~~

It will look like nothing happened, but now if you look at `scripted_bad_reads.txt`, you can see that there are now reads in the file.


> ## Exercise 2: Edit a script
>
> We want the script to tell us when it is done.  
> 
> > ## Solution
> > 
> > ~~~
> >1. Open `bad-reads-script.sh` and add the line `echo "Script finished!"` after the `grep` command and save the file.  
> >2. Run the updated script.
> > ~~~
> > {: .bash}
> {: .solution}

## Making the script into a program

We had to type `bash` because we needed to tell the computer what program to use to run this script. Instead, we can turn this script into its own program. We need to tell it that it is a program by making it executable. We can do this by changing the file permissions. We talked about permissions in [an earlier episode](https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/shell-metagenomics/02-the-filesystem/index.html).

First, let us look at the current permissions.

~~~
$ ls -l bad-reads-script.sh
~~~

~~~
-rw-rw-r-- 1 codespace codespace 0 Oct 25 21:46 bad-reads-script.sh
~~~

We see that it says `-rw-r--r--`. This combination shows that the file can be read by any user and written to by the file owner (you). We want to change these permissions so the file can be executed as a program. We use the command `chmod` as we did earlier when we removed write permissions. Here we are adding (`+`) executable permissions (`+x`).

~~~
$ chmod +x bad-reads-script.sh
~~~

Now let us look at the permissions again.

~~~
$ ls -l bad-reads-script.sh
~~~

~~~
-rwxrwxr-x 1 codespace codespace 0 Oct 25 21:46 bad-reads-script.sh
~~~

Now we see that it says `-rwxr-xr-x`. The `x`'s there now tell us we can run it as a program. So, let us try it! We will need to put `./` at the beginning, so the computer knows to look here in this directory for the program.

~~~
$ ./bad-reads-script.sh
~~~

The script should run the same way as before, but now we have created our own computer program!

It is good practice to keep any large files compressed while not using them. In this way, you save storage space; you will see that you will appreciate it when you advance your analysis. So, since we will not use the FASTQ files for now, let us compress them. Moreover, run `ls -lh` to confirm that they are compressed. 

~~~
$ gzip ~/dc_workshop/data/untrimmed_fastq/*.fastq
$ ls -lh  ~/dc_workshop/data/untrimmed_fastq/*.fastq.gz
~~~

~~~
total 428M
-rw-r--r-- 1 codespace codespace  24M Nov 26 12:36 JC1A_R1.fastq.gz
-rw-r--r-- 1 codespace codespace  24M Nov 26 12:37 JC1A_R2.fastq.gz
-rw-r--r-- 1 codespace codespace 179M Nov 26 12:44 JP4D_R1.fastq.gz
-rw-r--r-- 1 codespace codespace 203M Nov 26 12:51 JP4D_R2.fastq.gz
~~~

## Moving and downloading data

So far, we have worked with pre-loaded data on the instance in the cloud. Usually, however,
most analyses begin with moving data onto the instance. Below we will show you some commands to 
download data onto your instance or to move data between your computer and the cloud.

### Getting data from the cloud

Two programs will download data from a remote server to your local
(or remote) machine: ``wget`` and ``curl``. They were designed to do slightly different
tasks by default, so you will need to give the programs somewhat different options to get
the same behavior, but they are mostly interchangeable.

 - ``wget`` is short for "world wide web get", and its basic function is to *download*

 - ``cURL`` is a pun. It is supposed to be read as "see URL", so its primary function is
 to *display* webpages or data at a web address.

Which one you need to use mainly depends on your operating system, as most computers will
only have one or the other installed by default.

Let us say you want to download some data from Ensembl. We will download a tiny
tab-delimited file that tells us what data is available on the Ensembl bacteria server.
Before starting our download, we need to know whether we are using ``curl`` or ``wget``.

To see which program you have, type:
 
~~~
$ which curl
$ which wget
~~~

``which`` is a BASH program that looks through everything you have
installed and tells you what folder it is installed to. If it cannot
find the program you asked for, it returns nothing, i.e., it gives you no
results.

On Mac OSX, you will likely get the following output:

~~~
$ which curl
~~~

~~~
/usr/bin/curl
~~~

~~~
$ which wget
~~~

~~~
$
~~~

This output means that you have ``curl`` installed but not ``wget``.

Once you know whether you have ``curl`` or ``wget`` use one of the
following commands to download the file:

~~~
$ cd
$ wget ftp://ftp.ensemblgenomes.org/pub/release-37/bacteria/species_EnsemblBacteria.txt
~~~

or

~~~
$ cd
$ curl -O ftp://ftp.ensemblgenomes.org/pub/release-37/bacteria/species_EnsemblBacteria.txt
~~~

Since we wanted to *download* the file rather than view it, we used ``wget`` without
any modifiers. With ``curl`` however, we had to use the -O flag, which simultaneously tells ``curl`` to
download the page instead of showing it to us **and** specifies that it should save the
file using the same name it had on the server: species_EnsemblBacteria.txt

It's important to note that both ``curl`` and ``wget`` download to the computer that the
command line belongs to. So, if you are working in a Codespace and execute
the ``curl`` command above in the terminal, the file will be downloaded to your Codespace
environment, not your local machine.

### Moving files between your laptop and your instance

What if the data you need is on your local computer, but you need to get it *into* the
cloud? There are several ways to do this. While following this lesson, you may be using
the RStudio interface containing a terminal, some other terminal, or your own local computer. Depending on your setup, 
there are several alternatives to transfer the files. Here we describe how to use the RStudio interface 
to transfer files..
 
    
> ## Transferring files scenarios
> 1. If you are working on your **local** computer, there is no need to transfer files because you already have them locally.
> In that case, you only need to know the directory you are working in.
> 2. If you are working in **GitHub Codespaces**, you can download files directly from the VS Code interface by right-clicking on them in the Explorer panel and selecting "Download". You can also drag and drop files from your local machine into the Explorer panel to upload them.
> 3. If you are working on a remote machine via SSH, you can use the `scp` command. In that case, it is *always* easier
to start the transfer locally. **If you are typing into a terminal, the terminal should not be logged into your instance. It should show your local computer.**  
    

### Downloading files in RStudio  
    
We will follow the next five steps to download files with the RStudio interface. 
    
1. First, we select the file to download from the bottom right panel.  
<a href="../fig/02-05-03.png">
  <img src="../fig/02-05-03.png" alt="Download data with R Studio." 
     width="826" 
     height="235"
     alt="Bottom right panel where the file menu is displayed. The file to download is selected." />
</a>
    
2. Then, we choose “More” to display more actions for the selected file.  
<a href="../fig/02-05-04.png">
  <img src="../fig/02-05-04.png" alt="Download data with R studio." 
     width="826" 
     height="235"
     alt="More button highlighted." />
</a>
    
3. Within the "More" menu, the “export” button should become available.  
<a href="../fig/02-05-05.png">
  <img src="../fig/02-05-05.png" alt="Download data with R studio." 
     width="826" 
     height="555"
     alt="Export button highlighted." />
</a>
    
4. An emergent window should be displayed on your screen where you can select the “Download” option.  
<a href="../fig/02-05-06.png">
  <img src="../fig/02-05-06.png" alt="Download data with R studio." 
     width="729" 
     height="399"
     alt="emergent window where you write the name of the file and click download." />
</a>  
    
5. Your file should now be downloaded to your local computer.  


### Upload files in RStudio

Now that we learned how to download files from the RStudio interface,
we will learn the opposite action, uploading files from your local computer
to your remote machine.  
    
1. Choose the option 'Upload' in your RStudio interface.
<a href="../fig/02-05-08.png">
  <img src="../fig/02-05-08.png" alt="Upload data with R studio." 
     width="826" 
     height="235"
     alt="The Upload button is highlighted." />
</a>
    
2. After an emergent window is displayed on your screen, select “Select file”.
<a href="../fig/02-05-09.png">
  <img src="../fig/02-05-09.png" alt="Upload data with R studio." 
     width="636" 
     height="418"
       alt="Select filed button highlighted in the emergent window" />
</a>
    
3. A new screen is displayed on your computer where you should choose the file to upload. 
    Choose the file and click “open”.
<a href="../fig/02-05-10.png">
  <img src="../fig/02-05-10.png" alt="Upload data with R studio." 
     width="682" 
     height="460"
       alt="file to upload and open button are highlighted in the window of the local filesystem" />
</a>
    
4. Finally, if the file is correct, click “ok,” and the uploading will start.
    
5. Now, you can view a new file in your RStudio interface.
<a href="../fig/02-05-12.png">
  <img src="../fig/02-05-12.png" alt="Upload data with R studio." 
     width="800" 
     height="300" 
       alt="The uploaded file is shown in the R studio interface" />
</a>
    
 
### Transferring data between your local and virtual machine with `scp`  
    
`scp` stands for 'secure copy protocol' and is a widely used UNIX tool for moving files
between computers. The simplest way to use `scp` is to run it in your local terminal
and use it to copy a single file. While `scp <local-file-path> <AWS instance path>` will upload a local file into your AWS instance, 
`scp <AWS-instance-path> <local-file-path>` will move your file from your remote AWS instance into
your local computer. The general form of the `scp` command is the following:  
~~~
$ scp <file you want to move, local or remote> <path to where I want to move it, local or remote>
~~~

    
> ## Exercise 3: Uploading data with `scp`
> Let us download the text file  `~/data/untrimmed_fastq/scripted_bad_reads.txt` from a remote machine to your local computer.
> Which of the following commands would download the file?
> A)
> ~~~
> $  scp local_file.txt user@ip.address:~/
> ~~~
> {: .bash}
> B)
> ~~~
> $ scp user@ip.address:~/dc_workshop/data/untrimmed_fastq/scripted_bad_reads.txt ~/Downloads
> ~~~
> {: .bash}
>
> > ## Solution
> >    A) False. This command will upload the file `local_file.txt` to the user's home directory on the remote machine.
> >    B) True. This option downloads the bad reads file in `~/data/scripted_bad_reads.txt` to your local `~/Downloads` directory
> >       **(make sure you substitute user@ip.address with your remote login credentials)**
> >
> > Note: In GitHub Codespaces, you typically don't need `scp` - just right-click a file in the Explorer panel and select "Download".
> {: .solution}

---

## Key Points
- Scripts are a collection of commands executed together.
- Scripts are executable text files.
- Nano is a text editor.
- In a terminal, `scp` transfers information to and from virtual and local computers.
- R studio remote interface allows the transfer of information between virtual and local computers.
